In the recent few decades, the rate of smoking has increased dramatically. With a serious increase of nicotine addiction in our population, more and more people are becoming dependent on this drug. According to lung.org, from 2011 to 2019, middle school students’ use of electronic cigarettes increased 16.5 times from before (0.6% to 10.5%) and high school students’ usage increased by 17.33 times from before (1.5% to 27.5%). Additionally, in 2019, close to 2.9 million children started using electronic cigarettes. Because of this widespread dependency on nicotine and cigarettes, I set out to determine which type of treatment is more effective in reducing smoking. I will focus on 2 popular types of treatment: nicotine patch and pharmacotherapy. In this project, pharmacotherapy refers to prescribed pharmaceutical drugs to help treat nicotine addiction. The data used was gathered from a randomized trial of triple pharmacotherapy (combination) compared against nicotine patch (patchOnly), measuring for smoking cessation (nosmk). This dataset was gathered from a clinical trial described in 2009 by Steinberg and contains 125 observations with 12 variables: patient id (id), time measured in days (time), indication of relapse to smoking (status), randomly assigned treatment type (trt), age measured in years (age), (sex), (race), employment type (empl), number of years the patient has been smoking (years), how much the patient smokes (level), number of attempts to quit smoking (pa), and how long the patient has stopped smoking for the longest measured in days (nosmk).
